1. It is customary to begin a work by explaining in a preface the aim that the author set himself in the work, his reasons for writing it, and the relationship in which he believes it to stand to other earlier or contemporary treatments of the same subject. In the case of a philosophical work, however, such an explanation seems not only superfluous but, in view of the nature of the Thing,1 even inappropriate and misleading. For the sort of statement that might properly be made about philosophy in a preface—say, a historical report of the main direction and standpoint, of the general content and results, a string of desultory assertions and assurances about the true—cannot be accepted as the way and manner in which to expound philosophical truth. Also, philosophy moves essentially in the element2 of universality that embraces the particular within itself, and this creates the impression, more here than in the case of other sciences, that the Thing itself, in all its essentials, is expressed in the aim and the final results, whereas the elaboration is really the inessential. By contrast, we need no convincing that, in the general idea of what (for example) anatomy is—say, the knowledge of the parts of the body considered in their lifeless state—we are not yet in possession of the Thing itself, the content of this science, that we must in addition get to grips with the particular. Further, in the case of such an aggregate of information, which has no right to bear the name of science, a conversational account of aims and other such generalities is no different from the historical and unconceptual way in which the content itself (these nerves, muscles, etc.) is discussed. In the case of philosophy, by contrast, this would give rise to the incongruity that this manner of which philosophy makes use is shown by philosophy itself to be incapable of grasping the truth.

2. So too, determining the relationship that a philosophical work supposes it has with other undertakings on the same subject introduces an extraneous concern, and obscures what really matters in the cognition of the truth. As the opposition between the true and the false becomes firmly fixed for opinion,1 opinion tends to expect either assent or contradiction in response to a current philosophical system, and to see in any comment on such a system only the one or the other. Opinion does not comprehend the diversity of philosophical systems as the progressive unfolding of the truth; rather it sees in the diversity only contradiction. The bud disappears when the blossom bursts forth, and one could say that the bud is refuted by the blossom; similarly, when the fruit appears, the blossom is declared to be a false Being-there2 of the plant, and the fruit replaces the blossom as the truth of the plant. These forms are not only different, they also supplant one another as mutually incompatible. Yet at the same time their fluid nature makes them moments of the organic unity, in which they not only do not conflict, but each is as necessary as the other; and this shared necessity alone constitutes the life of the whole. But the contradiction levelled against a philosophical system does not usually comprehend itself in this way; nor does the apprehending consciousness generally know how to liberate the contradiction from its one-sidedness or keep it free, and to recognize the reciprocally necessary moments in the shape of seeming conflict and contrariety.

3. The demand for such explanations and the satisfaction of it are easily mistaken for a concern with what is essential. Where could a fuller expression of the inner core of a philosophical work be given than in its aims and results, and how could these be more distinctly recognized than by their difference from whatever else the age produces in the same sphere? But when this procedure is taken for more than the beginning of cognition, when it is accepted as actual cognition, then we must in fact count it as one of the devices for bypassing the Thing itself, and combining the semblance of seriousness and of application to the Thing with an actual avoidance of both. For the Thing is not exhausted by its aim, but by its elaboration, nor is the result the actual whole, but only the result together with its becoming. The aim by itself is a lifeless universal, while the tendency is a mere drift that as yet lacks its actuality; and the naked result is a corpse which has left the tendency behind. Similarly, the difference is really the limit of the Thing; it lies where the Thing ceases, or it is what the Thing is not. These exertions over the aim or the results, as well as over the differences and assessments of the one and the other, are therefore an easier task than they perhaps seem to be. For instead of dealing with the Thing, this sort of procedure is always away beyond it; instead of lingering in the Thing and forgetting itself in it, this sort of knowledge is always hankering for something else; it remains preoccupied with itself rather than absorbed in the Thing and surrendering to it. The easiest course is to pass judgement on a work of substance and solidity; to grasp it is harder; hardest of all is to combine the two by producing an account of it.

4. Culture and the emergence from the immediacy of substantial life will always have to begin in the following way. We get acquainted with universal principles and points of view; we work our way up at first only to the thought of the Thing in general; equally we learn to support or refute the Thing with reasons; we learn to apprehend the rich and concrete abundance with determinate precision, and to give an accurate account and a serious judgement of it. But this beginning of culture will first of all make room for the seriousness of life in its fullness, which leads into the experience of the Thing itself. And even if, in addition to all this, the seriousness of the concept descends into the depths of the Thing, this sort of information and assessment will retain its appropriate place in conversation.1

5. The true shape in which truth exists can only be the scientific system of truth. To help bring philosophy closer to the form of science—to the goal of its being able to give up the name of love of knowledge and become actual knowledge1—that is what I have set out to do. The inner necessity that knowledge should be science lies in its nature, and the only satisfactory explanation of this is the presentation of philosophy itself. But the external necessity, insofar as it is conceived in a general way, leaving aside contingencies of the person and individual motives, is the same as the inner necessity, in the shape, that is, in which time represents the Being-there of its moments. To show that the time is ripe for the elevation of philosophy to a science—this would therefore be the only true justification of the attempts that have this aim, because this would demonstrate the necessity of the aim, because it would indeed at the same time fulfil this very aim.2

6. When the true shape of truth is posited in this scientific character—or, what is the same thing, when the truth is asserted to have the element of its existence only in the concept—I am well aware that this seems to stand in contradiction with an idea, and with the consequences of that idea, whose presumption is as great as its prevalence in the convictions of our age. An explanation of this contradiction therefore seems hardly superfluous, even though here it can be no more than an affirmation, just like the view that it opposes. This is the view that the true exists only in what, or rather as what, is variously called intuition, immediate knowledge of the absolute, religion, Being—not in the centre of divine love, but the Being of this centre itself. If this is so, it follows that what is then required for the presentation of philosophy is not the form of the concept, but rather its contrary. The absolute is supposed not to be comprehended, but felt and intuited; it is not the concept of the absolute that is to have its say and find expression, but the feeling and intuition of it.1

7. If we look at the appearance of such a demand in its wider context, and consider the stage at which self-conscious spirit stands at present, it is clear that spirit has now advanced beyond the substantial life it formerly led in the element of thought,—beyond this immediacy of its faith, beyond the satisfaction and security of the certainty that consciousness possessed of its reconciliation with the essence and of the universal presence of the essence both within and without. It has not only passed beyond all this into the other extreme of the insubstantial reflection of itself into itself, but beyond that too. Spirit has not only lost its essential life; it is also conscious of this loss, and of the finitude that is its own content. Turning away from the husks, and confessing and cursing its sorry state, it now requires from philosophy, not so much knowledge of what it is, as philosophy’s help in establishing once more its substantiality and solidity of Being. Philosophy is supposed to meet this need, not by opening up the locked fastness of substance and raising this to self-consciousness, not by restoring its chaotic consciousness to the order of thought and the simplicity of the concept, but rather by blurring the distinctions of thought, by suppressing the differentiating concept and by establishing the feeling of the essence, providing edification rather than insight. The beautiful, the holy, the eternal, religion, and love are the bait required to arouse the desire to bite; not the concept, but ecstasy, not the cold advance of necessity in the Thing, but the ferment of enthusiasm, these are supposed to be what sustains and promotes the expansion of the wealth of substance.1

8. Corresponding to this demand is the strenuous, almost zealous and apparently furious effort to tear men away from their absorption in the sensory, the commonplace, the singular,1 and to direct their gaze to the stars; as if they had forgotten all about the divine, and were ready like worms to satisfy themselves with dirt and water. Formerly they had a heaven furnished with a vast wealth of thoughts and images. The meaning of all that is lay in the thread of light by which it was linked to heaven; instead of abiding in this present, our gaze glided along this thread beyond the present, up to the divine essence, to a present beyond, so to speak. The eye of the spirit had to be forcibly directed to earthly things and held there; and it has taken a long time and laborious effort to introduce the clarity that only other-worldly things used to have into the fog and confusion enveloping the sense for this world, and to make attention to the present as such, to make what was called experience, interesting and valid.—Now we seem to need the opposite: sense seems so firmly rooted in the world that it requires just as much force to raise it up. The spirit is clearly so impoverished that, like a wanderer in the desert longing for a simple drink of water, it seems to crave for its refreshment only the meagre feeling of the divine in general. The extent of spirit’s loss is to be measured by what satisfies it.2

9. This modest contentment in receiving, or parsimony in giving, is not, however, right for science. Whoever seeks mere edification, whoever wants to shroud in fog the worldly variety of his Being-there and of thought, in order to get the indeterminate enjoyment of this indeterminate divinity, can look for this where he likes. He will easily find the wherewithal to vent his ardour, and pride himself on it. But philosophy must beware of the wish to be edifying.

10. Still less must this complacency which renounces science make the claim that such hazy enthusiasm is superior to science. This prophetic talk supposes that it remains right in the centre and in the depths, looks disdainfully at determinacy (the Horos), and deliberately keeps away from the concept and necessity, away from the reflection that resides only in finitude. But just as there is an empty breadth, so too there is an empty depth; and just as there is an extension of substance that pours out into finite multiplicity without the power to hold it together, so is this an intensity without content, sheer force without any spread, and this is the same as superficiality. The force of spirit is only as great as its expression, its depth only as deep as it dares to spread out and lose itself in its display. Moreover, when this non-conceptual, substantial knowledge professes to have submerged the ownness of the Self in the essence, and to philosophize in a true and holy manner, it deludes itself: instead of surrendering to God, by spurning measure and determination it merely gives free rein by turns to the contingency of the content within itself and to its own wilfulness. When they give themselves up to the untamed ferment of the substance, they suppose that, by enshrouding self-consciousness and surrendering the understanding they become the beloved of God to whom he gives wisdom in sleep; and so what they in fact conceive and give birth to in their sleep are of course dreams.1

11. Incidentally, it is not difficult to see that our time is a time of birth and of transition to a new period. Spirit has broken with the previous world of its life and ideas, and is on the point of submerging it in the past; it is at work on its own transformation. Indeed, spirit is never at rest but always engaged in moving forward. But just as the first breath drawn by a child after its long, quiet nourishment breaks the gradualness of merely quantitative growth,—a qualitative leap,—and now the child is born, so the spirit that cultivates itself matures slowly and quietly into its new shape, dissolving bit by bit the structure of its previous world, whose instability is indicated only by isolated symptoms; the frivolity and boredom that infest the established order, the vague foreboding of something unknown, are heralds of approaching change. This gradual crumbling that did not alter the physiognomy of the whole is interrupted by the sunrise which, like lightning, all of a sudden reveals the contour of the new world.

12. But this new world does not have a complete actuality any more than the new-born child; and it is essential to bear this in mind. The first emergence is only its immediacy or its concept. Just as a building is not finished when its foundation has been laid, so the achieved concept of the whole is not the whole itself. When we wish to see an oak in the power of its trunk and in the spread of its branches and the mass of its foliage, we are not satisfied if we are shown an acorn instead. So too, science, the crown of a world of the spirit, is not complete in its beginnings. The beginning of the new spirit is the product of a wide-ranging revolution in various forms of culture, the reward of a complicated, tortuous journey and of an equally immense and strenuous effort. This beginning is the whole that has returned into itself from succession as well as extension, the resultant simple concept of the whole. But the actuality of this simple whole consists in this: these configurations that have become moments again develop anew and take on a configuration, but now in their new element, in the sense that has emerged.1